Well welcome to this month's Ask Your Ob Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray. From 7 till 8pm
this is a live show. We have callers calling in from 7.30 to 8pm to ask questions about
the topic that we are going to go through. This month's topic is going to be a round
up of the point that we left off in March discussing progesterone and estrogen. And
this month I want to dissect that a little more with some of the facts and some of the
arguments against and in fact plain refuting of those "facts" about how positive estrogen
was and how negative progesterone was in a paper that was written by Inger Sundström
Promona at the University of Uppsala in Sweden, apparently one of the leading experts on brain
metabolism and sex hormones. I mentioned in March that the PROTECT and SYNAPSE which are
acronyms, PROTECT and SYNAPSE trials of progesterone's anti-inflammatory effects used in the treatment
of traumatic brain injury were published and reviewed and apparently were relatively unsuccessful.
Now Dr. Stein, a 30 year PhD brain injury expert at Emory University was part of the
team which published the paper in the Journal of Neurotrauma and he outlined some very obvious
mistakes in the studies and basically said that the criteria with which the study was
done did not produce valid results and he was strongly opposed to the findings which
showed there was no positive benefit for progesterone citing some very good facts and evidence to
the contrary. So in terms of the ongoing lies if you like about how positive estrogen is
for you and/or how dangerous progesterone is for you, we have had for many years now
Dr. Raymond Peat joining us to discuss his findings and cover a lot of evidence that
he has unearthed himself and I am very pleased to have him on the show. So I wanted just
to quickly welcome Dr. Peat and then give people a little more information about how
to contact the studio for call-ins from 7.30 on. So Dr. Peat are you with us? Yes I am
here. Ok thanks so much for joining us. For people that are in the area there is a 707
number which is 707 923 3911 and I wanted to quickly ask, I just noticed as I came into
the studio that the 800 numbers have been scratched out. I was just about to correct
you in case you started saying that. Yeah apparently there is a problem with the 800
numbers so anybody can call from anywhere. The country code is 01 I believe. Yeah because
we have people from Finland, we have people from Australia and other places in the world.
So ok yeah 707 923 3911. So I also wanted just to point out that after business hours
or during business hours rather 9 to 5 Monday through Friday people can either call in and
either or write to me at my address Andrew@westernbotanicalmedicine.com or call if they have any questions or if
they want to follow up any consultations, nutritional consultations or related subjects
around health and the things that we are purporting to be things that are very beneficial for
you which you won't normally hear in the mainstream. Dr. Peat has been a big advocate of things
like thyroid and sugar and progesterone and the mainstream medicine and science would
argue that sugar is not good for you or that pregnenolone or progesterone for example are
not good for you when there is plenty of evidence to show that there is. I think this is probably
never so clear as in the trials of HRT and some of the withdrawing of those HRT programs
and hormone replacement therapy up quote unquote that women with estrogen dominance is probably
the last thing that they want is estrogen replacement but yet the industry and doctors
still continue to say that the bone health benefits of estrogen are to be advised and
that women with hot flashes and other mood disorders that estrogen is a lacking substance
that they actually need and will help them. So during the course of the next hour and
30 minutes or so I am going to be discussing some of the arguments for progesterone and
the arguments against estrogen and Dr. Peat with his background is probably never so qualified
to speak on the subject given that his PhD was in reproductive hormones. So Dr. Peat
would you just give an outline of your professional and academic background so people that are
listening can hear where you have come from? Before I studied biology I was a literature,
linguistics and art major and teacher and I decided to study biology initially to get
more understanding of how language and intelligence and consciousness work and what I found was
that brain biology, cognitive science so called was pure dogmatism, very little science in
it so I shifted over to reproductive physiology to basically study how the organism works
all the way from the germ cell to the brain and the brain science really is not distinct
from reproductive physiology. The brain is really the motor for the whole life process
and I did my dissertation in 1972 on the oxidative changes in the uterus in particular as it
changes with aging. Okay good so I guess let's just jump straight
into some of the questions that I had that we got left off from March and these are basic
inquiries into the mechanism by which estrogen has its negative effects and then we'll get
into an article that was written by Inger Sundström who is a professor at the University
of Uppsala and an apparent leading expert on brain metabolism and sex hormones who said
some very strange things that I'd like you just to hear and give your take on it.
Susceptible epilepsy and the estrogens like estrone, estriol and estradiol how do you
understand the triggering of the epilepsy in these certain susceptible females? It's
estrogen related isn't it? Yeah in my research I looked through everything
that had been done on physiology especially as it relates to the brain and uterus up until
1970 and I couldn't find any evidence that would clearly distinguish the physiology of
estrogen stimulation from x-ray stimulation or oxygen deprivation or vitamin E deficiency
which interferes with oxygen use. All of those things deplete the energy production of the
cell which is based on oxidation and when the brain is oversupplied with estrogen or
lacks its antagonist especially progesterone the whole system but everything in the brain
included wastes oxygen and is unable to keep the energy level up to the point that the
cells are stable and one of the strange things that has been overlooked or seen upside down
in both biology and medicine for most of the century is that high energy state of a cell
is the state in which it's ready to work and function but it is not acting all the time
it's sitting there ready to work and when it is forced to work more than it is ready
for the energy level falls and it gets into a state trying to restore the energy but it
is in a constantly active state. If you cause hypoglycemia by interfering with the liver
for example it works the same as a lack of oxygen and estrogen happens to interfere with
the supply of glucose to cells. It activates insulin but it also activates the release
of fatty acids from the tissues and the fatty acids block the ability to oxidize glucose
so estrogen does. It activates the cells by increasing the function of glutamic acid,
a brain excitant and in increasing glutamate it decreases GABA the inhibiting signal. GABA
should be produced by the breakdown of glutamic acid so estrogen is exciting the brain cells
and at the same time interfering with their use of oxygen and glucose.
Estrogen and the estrogens, estro and estrolysis, etc. these really mimic a kind of stress response
then?
Yes, I consider estrogen's function to be the controlled stress. The whole organism
is moving through a developmental process and it requires a constant supply of energy
and if that energy supply becomes fatally impaired then the function of estrogen in
the reproductive system is to erase the whole scheme that was producing the organism's
development through its life process. Suddenly the excess of estrogen as a stress signal
erases the whole program and reverts to the single multiplying cell. So without anything
interfering estrogen tends to produce the cancer cell but it also activates the production
of the egg and the readiness of the egg to start a new organism. So its proper function
should be once a month for a few hours to activate the potential new life and that only
starts at puberty. Up until puberty the brain is metabolizing at a very high rate and the
catamenial epilepsy tends to begin around the age of nine when estrogen is rising and
progesterone hasn't risen yet. The brain metabolism slows down at puberty so the body
takes it as a threat to survival and so it turns on the reproductive process.
I just wanted to kind of recount that you said that and I think I've understood this
in the correct way that estrogen, the only real benefit for estrogen then is the inflammation
it provides or promotes to stimulate implantation of a new site in the endometrium in terms
of successful pregnancies. Is that correct? And then outside of that it doesn't really
have too much benefit. Yeah, throughout the organism whenever the
tissue is stressed it tends to turn on locally the production of estrogen. That's how it
so easily leads to cancer because every tissue has the apparatus for making estrogen.
Right, you said every cell in the body can secrete it essentially.
Yeah, and after menopause when the production of progesterone becomes very limited there
is a tendency for all of the body's tissues to begin making estrogen. So it's just the
opposite of what the menopause doctors have been teaching. When progesterone disappears
the breast, the uterus, the brain, the liver, the skin, the fat, muscles even begin producing
estrogen, but it can't escape from the cell because it also increases the estrogen binding
protein, the estrogen so-called receptor. And in the absence of progesterone the intracellular
estrogen increases but it doesn't get into the blood so you measure the blood and it
looks like you're estrogen deficient. Interesting, it doesn't get into the blood,
huh? Yeah, exactly when you're being systemically
poisoned with intracellular estrogen. And as you've mentioned before on previous
shows estrogen is very responsible for edema, cell swelling and that inefficiency that comes
with that water logging from an energy point of view.
The individual cell swells up when it's being excited and de-energized. When you can get
the energy back up that squeezes the water out and that same swollen state occurs in
capillaries and blood vessels and even though they get thicker they become leaky. Water
goes through them into the tissues and out of your bloodstream and that's involved in
the circulatory problems of pregnancy. The blood volume can't be maintained while the
legs and feet tend to swell up and the kidneys sense the lack of circulation because the
blood volume has shrunk and so the kidneys send out signals to raise the blood pressure
to try to get more circulation. Interesting, and then lastly just wanted to
recap what you said about that depolarized and repolarized state of the cell. So you
mentioned that when a cell is in a ready state to perform work that relaxed state is what
is so important for that proper contraction, that proper action potential to occur to do
work and that in hypothyroidism the cell remains in a constantly stressed state where it's
not able to relax and it's that very lack of relaxation that causes the energy problems.
You can see exactly the same process in the heart muscle as in the brain and other cells
but it's very easy to study in the brain and in the muscle because the muscle is such a
concentrated muscle system and estrogen weakens but makes more frequent the contraction and
it's a great excess of estrogen causes a shock like state of the heart, rapid but very, very
weak pulsation where progesterone strengthens, it lets the cells build up energy so that
when it does contract it's a very powerful contraction and pumps very efficiently.
Okay, good. Well I never like to turn people away and I know you do this because you like
the interaction with people asking questions that you've no preparation for if you like,
you've not been prepared so there's a caller on the line who I think wants to ask a question
so let's take this caller, a call away from and what's your question?
Yes, hi my name is Shana from Hesperia. Hey Hannah, welcome to the show. What's your
question? Yes, my question is regarding chronic fatigue
syndrome. Can Dr. Ray Peat elaborate on what this is and what is the underlying condition
is it hypometabolism or what and then my second question is low dose naltrexone, is it effective
for CFS? Okay, I think there's a lot of break up on
the line but I think that first question was related to chronic fatigue syndrome, what
do you see, your ideas on chronic fatigue syndrome, how do you see it and then also
naltrexone I think was... Low dose.
Low dose naltrexone, LDN. Okay, Dr. Peat, what do you think of chronic fatigue syndrome
as a... One way of thinking of it is that it's very
similar to in the brain the seizure state or in the heart the failure state under the
influence of a lack of progesterone and excess of estrogen or simply such a deficiency of
energy that the cell goes into that swollen over excitable state. When a cell is in very
bad condition, as far as I know every cell in the body can also produce histamine as
it's getting very desperate, not only in a chronic sort of desperation cells produce
estrogen but in a most acute situation they produce histamine and in the hypothyroid,
low progesterone chronic state the body tends to locally produce a lot of histamine and
other inflammatory things. Okay, and what do you think about naltrexone,
low dose naltrexone, does that have any merit? In my experience using naloxone more than
naltrexone but they're essentially identical, one is a little more oil soluble, I found
that from one to four milligrams per day of naloxone would break a depressed condition
by suppressing the endorphins which are induced by lactic acid and fatigue. The endorphins
are another emergency measure to turn off the excitation but with a very small dose
some people use even a hundredth of a milligram and find a very therapeutic effect so I consider
four milligrams a day a fairly big, larger than necessary dose.
Okay good, so let me just quickly ask, I think we have another caller on the line, okay well
let's take this next caller and see where we're going, caller you're on the end, what's
your question? Hi, I have a question about the B complex vitamins, I've been listening
for a while so I understand B1, B2 and B3 and why they're beneficial, I wanted to go
backwards so B9 is I guess folic acid and B7 is biotin and I think in some of the stuff
I read about what people seem to be interpreting regarding your research or point of view is
that 1, 2 and 3 are important and 6 in a smaller amount but B5, anaphenic acid, B4, adenosine
and folic acid and B12 are probably not to be taken and so I'm probably not giving the
full story so I just wanted to say that's sort of the question, are these the bad guys
and if so why? Because when someone gets a B complex vitamin they actually have specific
ratios of all these in many cases and I'm just wondering are they properly named B vitamins
and or should they be taken and thought of separately as opposed to particular ratios
between each one of them to have the proper effect systemically? Dr. Peat I know you're an
advocate of liver for that reason but how would you define the B vitamins in terms of
necessity and the sources of? Their main metabolic similarity is that they are regulators and
facilitators of cell oxidative energy processes. Panthenic acid is somewhat off the main group
but it's very essential. It's anti-stress, helps with regulating blood sugar and allergies.
Sometimes 400 to 500 mg dose of panthenic acid can relieve stress symptoms and it's
unusual in that it doesn't affect the interactions of the others. It's sort of on a side line
where it can be taken in monkeys, they fed them a cup a day of pure panthenic acid with
no side effects. If you did that with any of the other B vitamins you would quickly
reach a toxic effect. Panthenic acid can be taken daily because all these are water soluble
but this can be taken daily up to 400 mg and you will see some benefit of cellular oxidative
energy. I'm thinking more about digestion too because some of these, like I've taken
B1 and B2 recently and I really believe it's helped my ability to digest things. I'm a
young man of around 60 so I'm just wondering how to take these, how much to take and how
often as opposed to what's being out there in the research because it seems to not be
accurate relative to what you're saying. The orthomolecular movement 40 years ago I think
encouraged a lot of overdose excess use of them. You can get extremely therapeutic results
sometimes with 5 or 10 times the minimum daily requirement like 10 or 20 mg of B1, 10 mg
of B2, 10 mg of B6 and so on. Sometimes larger doses are effective but I think it's good
to try the smallest dose, maybe 5 times the minimum daily requirement.
Okay, so it's okay to take that daily. So for the ones you mentioned, about 10 to 20
mg in a day is okay and I guess B3 is a little different in the sense you could take 400
to 500 of that one too, right? It's not just B5 but B3 also, am I right?
Niacin.
Niacinamide.
Yeah, it's important to get the amide form. The other releases, inflammatory mediators
and the niacinamide is safe up to at least a couple hundred milligrams but I think I've
seen people with brain, terminal brain diseases cure themselves taking just 150 or 200 of
niacinamide per day.
Okay, so and B7 is biotin. I hear people say that that will reduce your blood, your glucose
levels but then I read and I say, "Well gee, maybe that's not true. Maybe it actually regulates
them dynamically." So what about biotin? Is there any negatives to taking biotin in
like 5 to 10,000? I think it's micrograms, not milligrams.
I've seen the good results from very, very big doses of biotin but 50 years ago, some
animal studies showed that a moderate overdose could cause liver cancer. So I've always been
leery about it but I've never seen people repeating those experiments.
What's a dose? I mean what, so is 5,000 an excessive dose, micrograms or are you talking
about something like...
I would stick to around one milligram of biotin.
Okay, one milligram. Okay, gotcha. Okay, and then folic acid, you're kind of, I mean I've
read that you somehow think that's like somehow dangerous to take at all. I could be wrong
too but that's what I've read.
I think it's safe for the dose of around one milligram, maybe as high as five milligrams
per day but you have to be cautious with especially vitamin B2 and folic acid because something
in the synthetic process makes a lot of people get migraine headaches and hemorrhoids and
other very intense symptoms from those which happen to be yellow molecules and I think
it's something about their sensitivity to light and oxidation that makes the pure chemical
pretty allergenic for a lot of people.
So could it give you a rash too or something like that or just a headache?
I didn't hear that.
Could it give you a rash or just a headache?
The worst symptoms I've heard about are migraine-like headaches and bowel problems but that could
be the bowel inflammation can lead to rashes.
Okay that makes sense and then B12, I really almost see almost no writing on that or just
curious because a lot of people say you've got to have your B12 up and I know that gets
to methylation but is there an amount or is it the amount that you consume in your basic
diet should be more than enough?
Yeah, if you eat animal products in particular and the intestine bacteria can make a lot
of it.
I hear from a lot of people with small intestine inflammation who have about 50% higher than
the upper normal range for B12 apparently because their bacteria are thriving where
they shouldn't be.
Alright, I appreciate your questions, Cora and I've got to get on with the questions
that I've got for Dr. Peat surrounding last month's March's radio show so we can get into
some fresh topic.
Dr. Peat, I wanted to go over the article just briefly that was written by this professor
at the University of Uppsala in Sweden who is an expert on brain metabolism and sex hormones
just to illustrate to people how wrong things can get from the quote unquote academic professionals
and just to see how this was twisted in terms of what I'm about to speak verbatim from the
article and I just want to stop you at different points during this just to hear your side
of it so that you can point people in the right direction because people are going to
read these things on ResearchGate or PubMed or other places and just take it as the truth
because it's written by a university professor who specializes in this kind of thing but
just want to bring the truth home again wherever possible.
So an article was written about pregnenolone and progesterone and saying that basically
the negative associations with it were fairly rife and so just going through what she had
written, she talked about PMS and saying that for some people it was unpredictable and for
many it was hard to explain but feelings of worry associated with the menstrual cycle
had very specific cause and that this was the same hormone used in much birth control
and that 85% of women experience premenstrual stress or PMS in the days leading up to the
period and according to the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists as well
this condition comes with physical symptoms like painful joints or breasts, headaches,
sleeplessness etc and I'm sure most women can identify with these symptoms and she says
it's pretty much down to one hormone progesterone and she's the leading expert on brain metabolism
and sex hormone so she goes on to mention that progesterone appears after ovulation
one of the two main female hormones the other being estrogen and it's present in the first
two weeks of the cycle and has a broadly positive effect on news so this is estrogen. Estrogen
increases the brain's serotonin the hormone most associated with happiness progesterone
on the other hand can have a depressing effect so Dr. Peat what do you think about maintaining
this sentence even just regarding serotonin's positive effects? To be polite I think it's
very very silly everything there is confused and backwards for example the serotonin thing
is a happiness signal serotonin is very essential for the inflammation, osteoporosis, cancer,
blood clotting, spasms all sorts of bad effects inflammatory processes right from an excess
inflammatory processes dictated by serotonin. Yeah it's right there with histamine as the
most intense acute local inflammatory signal and in the brain that inflammatory process
of serotonin turns on the whole stress system that activates ACTH and cortisol. Estrogen
not only activates that serotonin dependent pathway but it directly activates the adrenal
glands to produce cortisol so estrogen is a basic stress hormone serotonin is kind of
a terminal mediator of that stress process turning on the defensive anti-stress cortisol
production but in itself serotonin is a very powerful bone destroyer by its inflammatory
process. It's basically an alarm signal no? Yeah. Okay well she without I guess laboring
that point she mentions as well as creating anxiety another side effect of progesterone
could be to cause a blues according to research by Torbjorn Backstrom from the University
of Umeå in Sweden it seems to have the same effect on the brain as depressive drugs like
alcohol and sleeping pills so where does she get that from that progesterone has this depressant
effect? That's a very interesting confusion of the meaning of depression in the heart
for example progesterone depresses the spastic activity that leads to cardiac arrest and
it depresses the premature contractions and facilitates a good rhythm. Estrogen has the
opposite effect tends to produce arrhythmia by delaying the ability to regain its energy
charge and get ready for the next beat. Okay alright so she also goes on to say most substances
in the body including hormones get broken down into other substances known as metabolites
before eventually being removed by the kidney or the liver when progesterone is broken down
its metabolites become active in the brain and it appears they and one in particular
allopregnanolone that we mentioned last month sorry in March allopregnanolone and pregnanolone
which both incidentally can be produced in the CNS both in the oligodendrocytes and astrocytes
so it's not you know you don't have to consume this product it's actually de novo synthesis
from cholesterol and she says these in particular allopregnanolone binds to a system called
the GABA-A receptor now we've mentioned and I've talked about the GABA-A receptor in relation
to things that bind to the GABA-A receptor to produce relaxation like valerian because
it is the opposite to the excitotoxic system but she says that the GABA-A receptor is a
little like the brain's police force it regulates making sure there isn't too much excitement
going on which seems seems okay on the face of it and drugs that bind to it may cause
it to step up policing and Backstrom's research suggests that metabolites of progesterone
may be doing the same thing so if female hormones have such distinct effects the next step is
to wonder why the female body is designed in this way and she suggests that it's more
a result of evolutionary design meeting modern living progesterone's effects she goes on
to say may be particularly pronounced now because women are having far more periods
and far fewer children than in the thousands of malnourished years before birth control
like birth control as a popular popularly appreciated product anyway 300 years ago women
started menstruating around 17 or 18 because they were less healthy than today so I'm not
too sure what you got to say about being less healthy and having a later menarche which
you've actually said and is well and shown that it's actually a positive thing to actually
have your period start early is actually related to high estrogen it's actually a very detrimental
to your long-term health isn't it yeah the age at menarche is getting lower and lower
all the time over the last several decades and that is now known to correspond to all
of the the estrogen problems later in life one of the recent groups of studies related
to the early puberty and the tendency to have autistic babies the uterus during gestation
it has a higher estrogen level in the women who started at a very young age okay she goes
on to say that most women got pregnant almost immediately you know several hundred years
ago without birth control and remain pregnant or breastfeeding for most of their reproductive
lives which ended around 40 now this this would have subjected them to a fairly sustained
level of progesterone correct through being pregnant yeah she seems to get it just exactly
wrong with pregnancy as a time of the low progesterone but the normal cycling woman
produces maybe 30 milligrams a day during the luteal phase before menstruation and the
ovaries weighing six or seven grams maybe are working pretty efficiently when they can
produce 30 milligrams a day but the placenta in the term pregnancy weighs about a pound
and a half roughly a hundred times bigger than the ovaries and it can produce at least
30 times as much progesterone per day and there's a an interesting discussion of the
effect of pregnancy on aging and general health in the book by a a a v everett and others
called hypothalamus pituitary and aging in which he describes experiments mating rabbits
constantly as soon as they have a live litter mate them again so that they live their whole
lives producing a maximum number of litters and others that were not mated the the multi
litter rabbits were had much more flexible young connective tissue their tissues were
less aged at the end of their lives than the non-mated and they mentioned studies done
in Hungary looking at the lifespan of women in relation to the number of babies they had
produced and graphing it from zero babies to eight babies the maximum that they calculated
they showed a straight line of life expectancy increasing with each baby that was born and
in the rabbits they showed that it was this very high constant almost constant exposure
to progesterone that was protecting reversing the estrogen induced age changes in the connective
tissue that made them live longer and be healthier.
Okay good well let's see put the word out there for people that may have questions I
know several people have called in and haven't got on so far so the area code is 707 923
3911 and the lights are flashing so in a few moments here we'll take this next call to
find out where they're from and what the question is.
Hi caller you're on the air what's your question and where you from?
Ask him again he was that was quick.
Okay you're on the air caller so where are you from what's your question?
Mike from Connecticut.
Okay Mike what's your question?
Yes I have a quick question for Dr. Ray Petit just wondering if you had a chance to review
the recent study that came out of Northwestern University about the correlation with taking
aspirin daily and the risk of melanoma looks like there's a double the risk in men.
Dr. Petit.
I saw that and I don't know what happened with all of the other cancers that have been
studied aspirin prevents them.
Yeah I find it strange as well it looks like it was a surprising result versus all the
other cancers.
You'll probably find the same thing with the synapse studies and the protect studies on
progesterone that didn't turn up with positive information you'll probably find the same
thing either methodology or yeah some of the methodology is probably going to be in question.
Sure okay and just one more question is what are his thoughts about hydrogen molecular
hydrogen water and the benefits it looks like there's a few studies coming from Japan looks
like there's some positive benefits.
Yeah everything I've seen looks like it's maybe simply reducing the free radical oxidative
damage substances like lipid peroxides it lowers inflammation in all the experiments
I've seen.
Okay that's a question we've got two or three more people on the line waiting so let's take
this next caller.
Caller what's your question where you from?
Yeah from Long Island my question relates to CO2 carbon dioxide therapy you'd mentioned
bag breathing and I've also heard about dry CO2 baths and I was just wondering if CO2
is heavier than air can you just put it in a bathtub and how would you measure it because
if you move around it seems like there'd be quite a bit of disturbance.
If you get in slowly and get out slowly it's so heavy that you don't flush much of it out
but you can check with a match or a lighter to find the level the match goes out as soon
as you sink it into the pure CO2.
Oh I see and you don't even have to take your clothes off to have a bath.
How long do you have to stay in there for benefit and how could you do this like once
a week or something you know like your recommendation on liver for example?
A 1908 article described it weekly bath in CO2 as being equivalent to a vacation at the
ocean.
For how long like at one time if to have effect?
It gets boring after an hour but you can get a big bag or tub and a plastic tub works fine
it doesn't have any leaks in it like a bathtub does and you can just sit in it and read or
watch TV or whatever.
Okay does that lower your temperature?
It has a warm sensation when it touches your skin but that's because it's opening up blood
vessels getting more blood to your skin so you could chill yourself I think if you did
it in a cold place because it would make you lose heat faster through your skin.
Does it matter whether it's like food grade or?
I use it from a welding shop.
I appreciate your call caller we do have three more people so I just want to make sure they
all get a chance so let's line up the next caller.
Caller where are you from and what's your question?
Hello caller where are you from and what's your question?
Can you tell me about MitoQ?
I think that's a new variant of CoQ10 and I don't know whether it's any better I've
never used it or studied it much.
Okay thank you.
Dr. Peate very quickly on CoQ10 and mitochondrial activity do you think there is relative merit
there for using CoQ10?
Yeah I think so in many cases a person is not producing enough of it and it happens
that vitamin K works with CoQ10 and makes it more effective and stable.
Incidentally in terms of dosage for K2 I noted that one of the kind of more leading producers
of K2 Thorne Research they produce a liquid vitamin K2 that I know has been recommended
to people especially if they're using aspirin as a therapy and they use a one milligram
per drop product.
Now I've just noticed that Thorne have rebranded their packaging and actually on their supplement
fact label it says one serving size is now 10 drops and so therefore 10 milligrams is
a serving size.
What do you think about K2's use with or without aspirin in that instance if you're mentioning
its affinity with CoQ10?
The Japanese have experimented with it at higher levels up to 40 or 45 milligrams per
day and I've known several people who had extremely high persistently high blood pressure
like 240 over 140 I think was one person's regular pressure for a year because his blood
vessels were very calcified and he took 40 or 50 milligrams per day of Thorne vitamin
K and after a week the pressure was much lower and after two weeks it was essentially normal
140 over 70.
Okay we've got two more questions at least, sorry two more callers at least.
One was what's the dosage for progesterone for a person who's thinking about trying it?
Yeah that's probably a very variable question, a very variable answer in terms of the use
it's being used for but what do you think Dr. Peat as a general for a female now presumably
what a progesterone dose would be?
And if you're taking it orally in an oil dissolved form 20 or 30 milligrams is a very effective
dose I've used as much as 100 milligrams myself for a headache it took about two minutes to
knock out a migraine.
There you go now you've mentioned again I won't go back to the article because we've
got callers but the quote-unquote depressing effect of progesterone is it's mildly sedative
and that's not a depressing effect but I guess in an energy term it is but it has a sedative
effect doesn't it?
Yeah it's a powerful sedative if you take enough, 100 milligrams after it knocked out
the migraine it put me to sleep for a couple hours.
Okay let's take these next callers, okay so caller you're on the air where are you from
and what's your question?
Hi my name is Peter I'm from San Francisco.
Hey Peter what's your question?
I had a question regarding the concept of earthing there's a lot of people that promote
going to the beach going to nature and taking off your shoes and walking around and I felt
benefit from going to the beach and taking my shoes off and walking around like that
and coming in contact with the actual earth.
What does Dr. Peat think is the mechanism behind that if there is any?
Negative ionized air is more abundant near the ocean or waterfalls I think that's part
of the good feeling you get at the beach another thing is the skin stimulation of freeing your
shoes from being imprisoned in shoes and socks that's a very powerful stimulant but supposedly
the body does the immune system for example reacts to the electrically charged things
in the environment for example they put nylon on some animals that supposedly was interfering
with the normal skin ionization and found that their immune systems were suppressed
and the earth is always a source of electrons actually relative to the higher atmosphere
you get a gradient with the positive at high altitude and the negative pole at the earth.
Thanks for your question Cora there's actually a couple more I'm going to hold for one second
we've still got two more quarters on the line so I hope to get to three now the lights going
again I just wanted to let you know that the article that was also written that Inger quoted
in that paper on supposedly progesterone's negative effects the American Congress of
obstetricians and gynecologists quoted this during some part of her paper that she's written
in diet and vitamin supplements may help ease PMS the ACOG the American Congress on Obstetrics
and Gynecologists suggests keeping blood sugar levels up with smaller more frequent meals
now there's good advice for you okay next caller I wanted to comment one very bad thing
about her paper was that she was talking about the amygdala activation I know there's so
many other questions I wanted to ask about it but carry on she was presenting it as a
negative fear thing but the amygdala regulates affection love anxiety and fear it isn't just
one sided yeah okay good let me quickly mention to people so they can get online themselves
and look at this paper then if they want to rewind this radio show or download it from
the archives her name is Inger sunstorm POROMAA University of Uppsala in Sweden and you know
what when you type in her name you do that search you'll get directed to research gate
and you got to scroll through the papers that she's written but you won't find this one
there what you got to do in the search when you look for it you'll find that it's related
to PMS and basically you know a treatment for PMS and and those situations where estrogen
typically is the cause of it and progesterone is the alleviator but when you click on that
link you'll find her paper and then you'll find what I've mentioned here word for word
of what she's quoted and then dr. Peat here's refuted it all right so two more callers on
the line let's take this first this next one hello yeah where you from and what's your
question I'm I'm Naomi from Willits and I've you've talked about migraine and things that
can make them can give you a migraine and things that can take it away but I missed
the first one I think you said biotin and folic acid was a tricky combination that could
cause migraine and then you said something that I just missed what you said actually
alleviated it so okay riboflavin and folic acid are the ones that are most irritating
and getting the intestine free of any of those irritants is very important of a fibrous food
such as raw carrot or cooked mushrooms helps to clean out the inflammatory substances from
the intestine but sugar sugar helps to stop the production of histamine and serotonin
okay and you said some I mean I have a b50 complex with C and it's got all those things
and I do suffer migraines I don't know if I should be taking riboflavin and folic acid
if I took one I would have a migraine for about three days I think but I don't that's
good they're probably protected again what you felt what alleviated migraine progesterone
sugar and things that stimulate your intestine such as raw carrots and cooked mushrooms to
remove bowel waste like estrogen and endotoxin progesterone and sugar yeah sugar helps to
stop the production of histamine and serotonin okay okay thank you very much thank you well
maybe fascinating show yeah good I don't want to prejudge it but maybe that last call didn't
really listen to any of the other previous shows where she would recognize that sugar
is actually very beneficial for you as well just like progesterone and pregnenolone are
beneficial and that's the cause and the reason that we do these shows is just to help people
understand that what they hear on the radio or read in the papers is not always the way
it is and it's driven by fairly powerful interests and lobbies okay we have one more caller so
let's make this real quick just two minutes caller and then I've got to have to terminate
you real quick one question you mentioned coq10 what about pqq is that also helpful
to manufacture and replace damaged mitochondria in conjunction with coq10 what was the name
of it pqq I can't that's the acronym p qq pure quinolone I've heard about that but never
studied it okay so that then the other question is before adenine was mentioned that you didn't
we didn't that's something that's not really mentioned as a b vitamin and I was just wondering
is that really just an omission for and it should is something that could be taken beneficially
externally like the other ones that someone went through earlier did you say adenosine
or I think it's adenine vitamin b4 is what I've heard it referred to as how did you pronounce
it I guess I thought it was adenine but maybe it's adenosine yeah I think so oh yeah adenosine
is sort of risky it's the opposite of caffeine in some way and it can bring on symptoms that
caffeine can alleviate so I wouldn't risk using adenosine that can cause an asthma attack
for example okay thank you okay thanks for your calls caller thanks so much for joining
us dr. Peat I really appreciate your time giving it as always okay thank you okay so
for those people who've listened to this evening show and or who may be called in I think there
was two other callers that never got through but dr. Peat can be found online at www.raypeat.com
he's got a pretty big comprehensive library of articles that are fully referenced you've
heard him speak I've worked with him for a long time and have seen a lot a lot of people
get beneficial results from his methodologies where other alternatives have not really produced
as much as I would have hoped so I'm ever forever grateful to his his teaching and his
wisdom okay so for those people who never listened go check out his website we can all
I can always be reached at www.westernbotanicalmedicine.com all of the shows are uploaded there they're
free to download there on the resources tab under ask your herb doctor and for the growing
YouTube population and the internet population has exploded his his his words his teachings
his advice is all over the internet and there's different repeat forums and clubs etc which
spin off different parts of what he has advised anyway go educate yourself you know if you
don't believe everything that you hear even me go read it go look at it find out for yourself
you know just do the work and thanks so much for joining us